- Lagena magna (plural)
- Lagenae magnae (sing)
- Lagenarum magnarum (gen plural)
- Costae longae (plural)
- Remedium amarum 
- Victoria vitae (victory of life) 
- Fractura costae (one rib) 
- Fracturae costarum
- Gemmae Betulae
- Tincturagemmarum Betulae

- Papilla linguae(papilla, aef.
- Papillae linguae

Papilla linguae: This translates to "Papilla of the tongue" in English. It refers to the small, raised structures on the surface of the tongue that contain taste buds. There are different types of papillae on the tongue, including filiform papillae (which do not contain taste buds) and fungiform, circumvallate (vallate), and foliate papillae (which contain taste buds and are responsible for taste perception).

Papillae linguae: This is the plural form of the phrase and translates to "Papillae of the tongue" in English. It refers to the collective small, raised structures found on the tongue's surface.

- collegae (FI kollega)


# Declination Secunda

Oculus 

n. oculus, oculi， oculi, cava
g. oculi, colurorum 
d. oculo, oculis 
acc. oculum, oculos 
abl. oculo, oculis 
v. ocule!, oculi 

Singular:

Nominative: oculus (masculine, singular) - "eye"
Genitive: oculi (masculine, singular) - "of the eye"
Dative: oculo (masculine, singular) - "to/for the eye"
Accusative: oculum (masculine, singular) - "eye" (direct object)
Ablative: oculo (masculine, singular) - "by/with/from the eye"
Plural:

Nominative: oculi (masculine, plural) - "eyes"
Genitive: oculorum (masculine, plural) - "of the eyes"
Dative: oculis (masculine, plural) - "to/for the eyes"
Accusative: oculos (masculine, plural) - "eyes" (direct object)
Ablative: oculis (masculine, plural) - "by/with/from the eyes"


Here are the English translations for the Latin phrases you've provided:

1. **Baccae Myrtilli:** Blueberry fruits.
2. **Cancer esophagi:** Esophageal cancer.
3. **Morbilli morbus contagiosus est:** Measles is a contagious disease.
4. **Intermusculos multinervi sunt:** There are many nerves between the muscles.
5. **Bulbus oculi in orbita est:** The eyeball is in the orbit.
6. **Causa morbi:** Cause of the disease.
7. **Causae morborum:** Causes of diseases.


good = bonus, bona
longus, longa, longum
magnus, magna, magnum 
magna cryostallus 
periodus longa 






