
## SEMINAR 15092023

1 Liquid systems and solutions, chemical equilibrium.  1. 1.25 moles of sodium hydroxide were dissolved in 450 grams of water. Calculate the mass fraction (%) of sodium hydroxide in the solution! (MNaOH = 40.0 g/mol) 2. In 800 cubic centimeters of water, 20 grams of sodium sulfate decahydrate were dissolved. Calculate sodium sulfate mass fraction (%) in the solution! (ğ‘€ğ‘ğ‘2ğ‘†ğ‘‚4 =142.04 ğ‘”/ğ‘šğ‘œğ‘™; ğ‘€ğ‘ğ‘2ğ‘†ğ‘‚4âˆ™10ğ»2ğ‘‚=322.0 ğ‘”/ğ‘šğ‘œğ‘™) 3. During 24 hours, an average amount of 800 mL of gastric juice are secreted in the stomach (Ï = 1.065 g/mL). Gastric acid contains â‰ˆ 0.5% hydrogen chloride. Calculate the total mass of hydrogen chloride that enters the stomach with gastric acid daily! 4. Calculate the mass and amount of aluminium ions that are in 300 mL of 24 % aluminium sulfate solution (Ï = 1.309 g/mL). 5. A 0.84 M solution of acetic acid is given, its density 1.01 g/mL. Calculate the mass fraction of acetic acid (%) in the solution. 6. You have a stock solution of 14.8 M NH3. How many milliliters of this solution should you dilute to make 100.0 mL of 0.250 M NH3? If you take a 10.0 mL portion of the stock solution and dilute it to the total volume of 0.250 L, what will be the concentration of the final solution? 7. How many mL of 95.12% sulfuric acid (ğœŒğ»2ğ‘†ğ‘‚4,95.12%=1.834 ğ‘”/ğ‘šğ¿) are needed to prepare  200 mL of 8.415% H2SO4 (ğœŒğ»2ğ‘†ğ‘‚4,8.415%=1.055 ğ‘”/ğ‘šğ¿)? 8. Finish the molecular equations and write full and net ionic equation for the reactions that take place: a) Cr2(SO4)3 + NaOH â†’ b) HBr + Ba(OH)2 â†’ c) NaCl + NiSO4 â†’ d) Na2CO3 + HNO3 â†’ 9. Write the expression for Kc (equilibrium constant) for the following reactions. In each case indicate whether the reaction is homogeneous or heterogeneous.  a) CH4 (g) + 2H2S (g) â‡Œ CS2(g) + 4H2(g) b) Ni(CO)4 (g) â‡Œ Ni (s) + 4CO (g) c) HF (aq) â‡Œ H+ (aq) + F- (aq) d) 2Ag (s) + Zn2+ (aq) â‡Œ 2Ag+ (aq) + Zn (s)   2 Ä¶Ä«mi1100: Chemistry for medical students  10. The equilibrium constant for the reaction 2NO (g) + Br2 (g) â‡Œ 2NOBr (g) is Kc = 1.3Â·10-2 at 1000 K. a) Calculate K'c for the reaction 2NOBr (g) â‡Œ 2NO (g) + Br2 (g). b) At this temperature does the equilibrium favor NO and O2, or does it favor NOBr?  11. The equilibrium 2NO (g) + Cl2 (g) â‡Œ 2NOCl (g) is established at 500 K. An equilibrium mixture of the three gases has partial pressures of 0.095 atm, 0.171 atm, and 0.28 atm for NO, Cl2, and NOCl, respectively. Calculate Kp for this reaction at 500 K.  12. At 373 K, Kp = 0.416 for the equilibrium 2NOBr (g) â‡Œ 2NO (g) + Br2 (g) If the pressures of NOBr (g) and NO (g) are equal, what is the equilibrium pressure for Br2 (g)?  
